# 2.1 Logic Operations

### Logical Operations and Operators

A **logical operation** is an operation containing special symbols or words that connect two or more segments of codes. It is most often used to test whether a certain relationship among the codes is true or false.

Logical operations are important because they allow us to chain different segments of codes together and **return different outputs** based on the evaluated results. This is first of the few ways we will learn in this chapter that gives us **greater flexibility** in programming.

Logical operations are connected by **logical operators**. The following operators are supported by the Ruby language.

| Operators | Formats | Descriptions |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `and` | `A and B` | Only when both `A` and `B` are true, then the condition is true. If **at least one** of A and B is `False`, then `and`evaluates to `False`. |
| `or` | `A or B` | If at least one of `A` and `B` is `true`, then the condition is `true`. If **both** `A` and `B`are `False`, then `or`evaluates to `False`. |
| `&&` | `A && B` | Equivalent to the `and` operator |
| `||` | `A || B` | Equivalent to the `or` operator |
| `not` | `not A` | Reverses the logical state of `A`. If `A` is `true`, then not evaluates to `false`. If `A`is `false`, then `not` evaluates to `true`. |
| `!` | `! A` | Equivalent to the `not` operator |

Here are some examples below:

```bash
irb(main):001:0>(5 > 3) and (7 == 7)
true
irb(main):002:0>(5 < 3) or (7 == 7)
true
irb(main):003:0>(5 > 3) && (7 == 7)
true
irb(main):004:0>(5 < 3) || (7 == 7)
true
irb(main):005:0>not(5 > 3)
false
irb(main):006:0>!(5 > 3)
false
```

### Short-circuiting and Evaluating Logical Expressions

Now, as you are reading through the descriptions and examples of each logical operators. You may realize that there may be situations where **one of the evaluation criteria is satisfied before reaching the end of the logical operations.** This is called **short-circuiting**.

**Short-circuiting** happens when the operator reaches an operand that allows them to make a conclusion about the entire logical operation.

The `and`,`or`, `&&`, `||` operators contain short-circuiting, and the specific rules for evaluating are shown below:

| Operators | Checks If | Evaluates from Left to Right Up to |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `and`, `&&` | **all** statements are true | the first `false` value |
| `or`, `||` | **any** of the statements is true | the first `true` value |

Note that if `and` and `or` do not short-circuit, they **just return the last value**. Keep in mind that `and`and `or` **don't always return booleans** \(`true, false`\) when using values other than `true` and `false`.

Here are some examples that illustrates this example:

```bash
irb(main):001:0>5 and 3
3
irb(main):002:0>1 or 0
1
irb(main):003:0>6 and (not 7)
false
```

Remember back from [section 1.4](https://e98.gitbook.io/e98/~/edit/primary/2.-make-your-codes-smarter/2.1-logic-operations) when we introduce booleans, we talk about expressions that are considered to have `false` values \(more specifically, `nil`\). It is important to know that unlike in other programming languages you may have encountered, the followings are **NOT** considered to have `false`values in Ruby.

1. The Number Zero: `0`
2. The Empty String: `""`, `''`

### Chaining Multiple Logical Expressions

Now, the logical operations we will be working are certainly more complex than just simply `A and B`, `A or B`, `not A`. So it is important to know a bit more guidelines below that will help you evaluate and understand programs better:

Logical operators, similar to arithmetic operators, also have an **order of operation**:

1. `not`, `!` have the **highest priority**
2. `and`, `&&` have the **middle priority**
3. `or`, `||` have the **lowest priority**

Sometimes, to help understand complex and chained logical operations better, we can use **parentheses**to indicate **which expression gets evaluated first**.

### Let's Practice a Bit

Now that you've understood how logical operations and operators work, let's practice a bit to test your comprehension. Decide what the following expression will evaluate to in the IRB interpreter.

```bash
irb(main):001:0> !3 or true && 5
```

Before we get to the answer, let's analyze the expression first:

1. Using **the order of logical operation** and **left to right evaluation**, we can group the expression together using parentheses first.
2. The new equivalent expression will now be: `(((!3) or true) && 5).`
3. Now, let's evaluate the logical expression, starting with **the innermost statement**.
4. `(!3)` evaluates to `false`.
5. `false or true` evaluates to `true`.
6. `(not 5)` evaluates to `false`.
7. Finally, `true && 5` evaluates to `5`.
8. Hence, the entire logical expression evaluates to `5`.

Now it's your turn to evaluate the expression below. **Think your way through it, draw an expression tree if you need to clear up the process a bit**. If you have any confusion, **don't hesitate to reach out to us on slack.**

```bash
irb(main):001:0> not 0 || false or 2 || 1 / 0
```

