# 2.11\* Introduction to Logic - Part II

### Equivalent Logical Operations

Suppose in our Ruby programs there are the following two conditions regarding a number `x`:

1. ```ruby
   x > 0
   ```
2. ```ruby
   x < 10
   ```

If we want to create a compound condition statement that essentially restricts the value of `x` to a value between 0 and 10 for the inner code block to execute, we can simply apply the `and, &&` operator:

```ruby
(x > 0) and (x < 10)
(x > 0) && (x < 10)
```

Now, how about the compound conditional statement below?

```ruby
not (x <= 0 or x >= 10)
```

If we want `x` to be not smaller or equal to 0 or not bigger or equal to 10, isn't this equivalent to simply saying that x must be greater 0 while smaller than 10? 

Another way to think about this is using the definition of `or` . Since `or` evaluates `true` when **at least one of the conditions is** `true`, and we are enclosing everything inside a `not` statement, which essentially **turns overall true into overall false**, in order for us to execute the inner code block inside the if statement, `x <= 0 or x >= 10` **must evaluate to false**. This happens **only when both conditions are false**, which is equivalent to saying that `x` **should be some value such that it is not smaller or equal to 0 or greater or equal to 10.** 

More Generally, from the example above, we have discovered an pair of equivalent logical operations! If we abbreviate `x <= 0` as $$P$$ and `x >= 10` as Q, we have found that $$\neg P \wedge \neg Q$$ is equivalent to $$\neg ( P \vee  Q) $$. This is known as one of the De Morgans Law, a very useful shortcut for breaking apart and evaluating logical expressions. 

{% hint style="info" %}
Now, consider the following two conditional statements. Are they equivalent?

```ruby
if (x > 0) or (x < 10)
    ...
if not (x <= 0 and x >= 10)
    ...
```

Did you also notice something peculiar about these two statements? 
{% endhint %}

### Truth Table

Equivalent Logical Operations help **simplify our logic and provide shortcuts when we have the value for each individual conditions or their conjunction/disjunction \(one of them\).** 

However, there are still many more logical operations that cannot be simply broken part using the pattern we have seen above. There are also many more equivalent logical operations, not every single one of them can be summarized into a law or theorem. 

This is when the use of truth table comes in handy. 

> A **truth table** is a mathematical table used in logic, specifically in connection with boolean algebra and boolean functions—which sets out the functional values of logical expressions on each of their functional arguments, that is, for each combination of values taken by their logical variables. --From Wikipedia

Sounds confusing? To put in its simplest term, a truth table lists out a combination of **all the possible boolean values each condition can take on** and evaluate **what the corresponding compound statements with these inputs will produce respectively.** 

Here, the primary two functions of truth table we want to emphasize are:

1. Finding / Showing Equivalent Logical Operations
2. Simplifying Unnecessary Logical Operations 

As we have seen above, one of the De Morgans Laws states that for two conditions $$P, Q$$:

$$
\neg P \wedge \neg Q \equiv \neg ( P \vee Q)
$$

Note that $$\equiv$$is the congruence operator, meaning that the two statements are equivalent. 

Besides our logical argument, we can also show this law is true using a truth table.

| $$P$$ | $$Q$$ | $$\neg P$$ | $$\neg Q$$ | $$\neg P \wedge \neg Q$$ | $$P \vee Q$$ | $$\neg ( P \vee Q)$$ |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| T | T | F | F | F | T | F |
| T | F | F | T | F | T | F |
| F | T | T | F | F | T | F |
| F | F | T | T | T | F | T |

To clarify what we are doing above, we are starting with a list of all possible combinations of the values conditions $$P$$ and $$Q$$ can take on \(TT, TF, FT, FF\), and evaluate what $$\neg P \wedge \neg Q$$ and $$\neg ( P \vee Q)$$ would lead to respectively for each of those combinations.

As we can see, since the columns for both expressions agrees completely with each other, we have shown that the two logical operations are equivalent \(no matter what the input values for $$P$$ and $$Q $$ are, their output are the always the same\).

Truth tables can also be used to detect and simplify unnecessary logics. 

For example, consider the conditional statement in earlier part of the textbook:

```ruby
(x > 0) or (x < 10)
```

Let `x > 0` be the first condition $$P$$, and we can see that its negation $$\neg P$$ is included within the second condition `x < 10` \(i.e. a number that is smaller or equal to 0 is definitely smaller than 10\). 

Therefore, we can split the original compound conditional statement into the following 2 parts:

1. ```ruby
   (x > 0) or (x <= 0)
   ```
2. ```ruby
   (x > 0) or (0 < x < 10)
   ```

Applying truth table to the first statement, we have:

| $$P$$ | $$\neg P$$ | $$P \vee \neg P$$ |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| T | F | T |
| T | F | T |
| F | T | T |
| F | T | T |

As shown above, the first case of the compound statement **will always be true** \(also known as a **tautology**\). Since we have shown that the first compound statement is included within the original statement, we know that **the original statement will always return true** as well. 

We can see now that the conditional statement `(x > 0) or (x < 10)` is **utterly unnecessary since it will always output true no matter what, so it should be removed or replaced with some other conditions.**

