# 2.2 Flow Control

Besides logical operations that can provide various outputs depending on the evaluated results, we can also more directly control the execution of codes using conditional statements.

> In computer science, **flow control** is the order in which individual statements, instructions or function calls of an imperative program are executed or evaluated. --from Wikipedia

In Ruby, **conditional statements help form the control structure of a program**. A conditional statement takes the result of a logical expression and executes a block of code depending whether the expression evaluates to a true value or a false value. **If the test expression evaluates to a true value, the codes under that condition are executed; otherwise, they are skipped.**

### The `if` Statement

The simplest conditional statement in Ruby is the **if-statement**. Its syntax is illustrated below:

```ruby
if <expression>
    <code block>
end
```

As shown above, the **if-statement** takes in a **logical expression** \(can be as complicated as you want it to be\). If the logical expression evaluates to a `true` value, the **indented** `code block` \(consider it as under the if branch\) will be executed; otherwise, the code block is skipped. The `end` statement at the end **signals the end of the conditional statement** to avoid confusion with other parts of the program.

An example of this would be:

```ruby
x = 7
if (x > 5) && (x < 10)
    x = x + 5
end
puts x
```

As we can see above, `x` is clearly greater than `5` and smaller than `10`. Therefore, we execute the inside the if-statement, increment the value of `x` by `5`, so `x` is now `12`. Reaching the end of the conditional statement, we print the current value of `x`, which gives us `12`.

### The `unless` Statement

In Ruby, the `unless` statement is the **opposite** \(or **negation**\) of the `if` statement. In other words, it is equivalent to the if statement, except that we put a **negation** \(`not`, `!`\) **operator** in front of the whole logical expression.

Here is an example illustrating this:

```ruby
a = 8
unless a == 7
    puts 'a is not 7'
end
```

As we can see above, `a` is not `7`, therefore, we **execute the inside of the unless statement**, and `'a is not 7'` gets printed.

Note that as we mentioned before, an `unless` statement like the one above **can be replaced** by the following `if` statement:

```ruby
a = 8
if !(a == 7)
    puts 'a is not 7'
end
```

### The `if-elsif-else` Block

This is the last main control structure we will learn in this section. The `if-elsif-else` block provides you with great control over the execution of codes.

Because **you can add as many** `elsif` **statements in and between** `if` **and** `else` **as you would like**, you can significantly **diversify the output of your program.**

The flow of execution of the `if-elsif-else` block is similar to the previous two conditional statements. You start with the `if` statement. If the `if` statement is **not satisfied, you move on** **to the next one**, usually an `elsif` statement. If that statement is also not satisfied, you move on, **until you have reached one that fulfills the criteria \(the logical expression evaluates to a** `true` **value\)** or **come to the end of the control structure** \(the `else` statement\).

Here is an example illustrating the syntax of this method:

```ruby
if <expression>
    <code block>
elsif <expression>
    <code block>
elsif <expression>
    <code block>
... more elsif statements
else
    <code block>
end
```

Note that you **must start with an** `if` **statement** and **end with an** `end` **statement**. You can only have **one** `if` statement and **one** `end` statement. Besides the `if` statement, **none of the other statements are mandatory. In addition, the** `else` **statement does not carry any logical expression.**

Here is an actual example of the `if-elsif-else` block:

```ruby
x = 8
if x < 5
    puts 'x is smaller than 5'
elsif x ** 2 < 0
    puts 'x is imaginary'
elsif x % 2 == 1
    puts 'x is odd'
else
    puts x
end
```

With `x` initialized to the value of `8`, we run `x` against the **logical expressions \(top to bottom\)** in the `if-elsif-else` block. `x` is greater than `5`, so the `if` **statement is skipped**. `x**2` is `64`, which is greater than `0`, so the first `elsif` **statement is also skipped**. `x%2` is `0`, which is not equal to `1`, so the second `elsif` **statement gets skipped as well**. Finally, we **have reached the end of the block, so we execute the** `code block` **in the** `else` **statement by default**, and `8` gets printed.

### Short-hand `if` Expressions

We can also make our if expressions even more concise in one line by using some short-hand expressions. While they are not required for you to understand control flow, they can **help save some space in coding \(not necessarily improving the program's readability\)**. Here, we will talk about **2 main short-hand expressions.**

1. **One-line** `if` **Expression**

   Here is the syntax of the one-line expression below \(note that it **works exactly the same** as the `if` expression\).

   ```ruby
   <code in one line> if <expression>
   ```

   The one-line expression is usually used for **conditional assignment**.

2. **Ternary Operator**

   This is quite similar to the one-line `if` expression, except that it also **allows a different output if the logical expression is evaluated to a** `false` **value instead.** Here is the syntax of the ternary operator below.

   ```ruby
   <expression> ? <code block if true> : <code block if false>
   ```

   The ternary operator is also mostly used for conditional assignment. Here is a similar example:

   ```ruby
   irb(main):001:0>y, threshold = 3, 3.5
   irb(main):002:0>y = (y > threshold) ? ('No need to change') : (y + 1)
   irb(main):003:0>y
   4
   ```

Now, we have learned several ways of controlling the execution of your program. This has given us unprecedented flexibility and freedom in achieving goals that are previously unattainable. While there are still more advanced control structures we can learn \(such as the `case` expression\), we won't mention them here. The main objective here is to understand that **they all work logically the same, and that conditional statements are the building blocks of the control structure of a program.**

