# 2.5 Scope

Scope is an important concept in programming \(not just Ruby\). It helps us understand how different components of our codes \(variables, methods, etc.\) interact with each other. In addition, it allows us to recognize some of the most common errors in our programs and debug our codes.

### So What Exactly is Scope?

To put it simply, scope means **accessibility**, **whether a variable or a method can be accessed within the current environment**. It's about the variables and methods you can **call** at a particular moment in a particular part of your codes.

Take a look at the following example:

```ruby
a = 5
b = 'hello'
puts a, b
```

If we look at line 3 of this code block above, **in the scope defined by that particular moment**, we can access both variables `a` and `b`. **Therefore, we are able to print the values of both** `a` **and** `b` **to the console.**

The scope we mention above is also called the **Global Scope**, and both variables `a` and `b` are called **Global Variables.**

It is important to know that in Ruby, a program **ALWAYS** starts with the **Global Scope.** As we begin **defining methods** \(other than simple variables\), we introduce different scopes bound to those methods, and all of these scopes are enclosed within the **Global Scope**.

Here are two rules below that can help us better understand scope in Ruby:

1. The Global Scope **encloses all other scopes.**
2. In a particular scope, any variable defined **strictly in that scope** \(**NOT** including the variables contained **in the scopes created within that scope** or **the variables outside the scope**\) is accessible.

Let's try visualizing what this means.

As you can see, we can only access the variables in the region that is **right under the designated scope**. Any attempt to call variables outside that region will raise an Error.

### Local Scope

A Local Scope is created when we are inside a method that we define. You can view the beginning of the `def` statement all the way to the `end` statement as the **boundary** of the Local Scope.

A Local Scope is **just like the Global Scope**, except that it is not defined at the beginning of the Ruby program, but **a method inside that program** instead.

### Variable Scoping

Now that we've learned about the basics of scopes, let's see if we understand what's happening in the program below:

```ruby
num = 3
def add(x)
    x = x + 1
    return x
end
add(num)
puts num
```

So we have a **global variable** `num` bound to the value of `3` and a method `add` that adds one to whatever argument is passed into its body. At line 5, we call this method, with `num` as the passed-in variable. However, at the moment we call `add` , we are **inside the local scope** created by this method, and we have the **local variable** `x` bound to the value of `num,` which is `3` , so as a result, we **aren't really changing** the value of `num` here. Consequently, when we print the value of num in the last line, the value of `3` gets printed.

It is crucial to know which scope your variable is defined in. This helps avoid errors in your codes caused by accessibility of the variables due to the nature of scoping.

