# 2.6 Introduction to Recursive Programming

### What is a Recursive Function?

A function is called **recursive** if the body of the function calls the function itself, either directly or indirectly. That is, the process of executing the body of a recursive function requires applying that function again.

Here is an example below that illustrates the recursive function:

```ruby
def recursive()
    puts "This is recursive"
    recursive()
end
```

As we can see, in the example above, there is a call to the function `recursive()` **inside the body of this function**. This makes this function recursive.

### The Proper Structure of a Recursive Function

With a recursive function, you need to be extra careful with its behavior as sometimes you may **accidentally create a function that goes on forever** \(or never terminates\). This could result in a stacklevel too deep error or even crash the program eventually.

The example above with `recursive()` is one of these cases where the recursive function never terminates: it **just repeatedly calls itself**, and what will end up happen in the console are **endless** lines of the sentence `"This is recursive"` that get printed.

So how to avoid an endlessly recursive function? -By following the **proper structure** of a recursive function.

Following the pattern within the bodies of many recursive functions, the structure usually begins with a **base case**, a **conditional statement** that defines the behavior of the function for the inputs that are simplest to process.The base cases are then followed by one or more **recursive calls**. Recursive calls always have a certain character: they simplify the original problem by **reducing the work that needs to be done**.

Here is the general structure of a recursive function in terms of syntax below:

```ruby
def recursive(args)
    if <condition> .    #base case
        return <value>
    elsif <condition> . #other cases
        return <value or some expressions involving a call to recursive(args)>
    ...
    else
        return <some expressions involving a call to recursive(args)>
    end
end
```

As you can see, the function begins with the **base case** \(which signals **the end of a recursive function**\): if the base condition is satisfied, the **base value is returned**. All other cases that follow represent **different scenarios that could have occurred** during the execution of this function for different arguments. They either return **a definitive value** like the base case or return **some expression involving a recursive call to the original function \(**_**with different arguments**_**\)**. The last conditional suite **always**involves the recursive call.

Here is an example that illustrates this:

```ruby
# returns the positive integer n
def same_n(n)
    if n == 0
        return 0
    else
        return 1 + same_n(n-1)
    end
end
```

As shown above, `n==0` represents the base case, and the final value for that recursive call \(`0`\) is returned. The other case involves adding `1` each time to **a recursive call to the original function** but with **the argument less than its previous value by** `1`**.** As you can see, this function actually simply returns `n` \(which is the original value we pass in\) because for `n` to reach the value of `0`, we have to subtract `n` times, during the process of which `1` is added to the final result `n` times.

### Tracing a Recursive Function

As the example above shows, tracing a recursive function is important to understand how it behaves,

Note that for the tracing we mention here, it is often **unnecessary for you to trace through the execution of the entire function** \(from the initial case to the final base case\). What is important is you are able to **discover some helpful patterns after iterating the recursive process for maybe 2 to 3 times.**

Here is an example demonstrating the tracing of a recursive function:

```ruby
def mystery(n)
    if n<0
        return 0
    elsif n<=1
        return n
    else
        return mystery(n-1)+mystery(n-2)
    end
end
```

What would the method call `mystery(3)`return?

Before moving on to the answer, try tracing the program on your own.

To trace the call `mystery(3)`, we begin with the initial passed-in value of `4` for the local variable n inside the method `mystery`.

1. `n` is greater than `1` , which in turn executes the body of the last conditional statement. This returns the recursive call `mystery(2) + mystery(1)`
2. We will evaluate the expression from left to right on the right side of the equal sign, so let's see what mystery\(2\) gives us.
3. `n` is still greater than `2`, which in turns executes the body of the last conditional statement. This returns another recursive call `mystery(1) + mystery(0)`.
4. We use the left-to-right order of evaluation again. This time, for `mystery(1)`, `n` is smaller or equal to `1`, so a call to `mystery` returns `1`. Similarly, `mystery(0)` returns `0`. 
5. Adding the two values together, we have `mystery(2) = 1 + 0 = 0`.
6. Now, let's return to the second call to mystery for the original expression. Again, we are calling mystery with a passed-in argument smaller or equal to `1`, so the method will directly returns that value. 
7. Therefore, `mystery(3) = 1 + 1 = 2`. 
8. The call `mystery(3)` will return the value `2`. 

{% hint style="info" %}
Following the method above, what would the call `mystery(4)` return? How about `mystery(5)`? Can you see a pattern in the output? 
{% endhint %}



