# 2.7 Iteration

### Why Iteration?

Like what we have seen in [section 2.3](2.3-conditional-loop.md), while loop allows you to write codes iteratively, meaning that you can repeat a similar process for a certain number of times \(called the number of iterations\). The importance of iterations in programming comes in that it **helps simplify and organize processes that carries significant patterns and repetitions into simpler and cleaner blocks** that continuously execute themselves over and over again. 

As you may have seen in other programming languages such as Java or Python, one very common way of iterating is through a **for loop.** For example, in the program below, the value of `x` will be printed 3 times as i increments iteratively from 0 to 2. 

```java
for (int i = 0; i < 3; i ++ ){
    System.out.println(x);
}
```

Don't worry about the syntax above. The key to take from this example is that the iteration relies on some kind of **counter variable** that stand as a point of reference for the program to know how many times to iterate and when to stop. 

{% hint style="info" %}
What is the counter variable in the code block above?
{% endhint %}

### Iteration in Ruby

Ruby supports iterations as well, but with a completely different approach and syntax. Instead of having an enclosing `for` loop where the user has to define and keep track of many of the characteristics of the iteration, Ruby provides a much more direct and less error-prone way to iterate. 

In this section, we will look at primarily 3 ways of iterating in Ruby.

1. ```ruby
   x.times do
       <code block>
   end
   ```

   As straightforward as the syntax suggests, the program above will allow user to execute the inner code block `x` times. For example, if we want to print the value of `y` three times, here is what the syntax would look like:

   ```ruby
   3.times do 
       puts y
   end 

   ```

2. ```ruby
   a.upto(b) do |i|
       <code block>
   end
   ```

   As the phrase `upto` suggests, the program above will allow user to execute the inner block repeatedly as the integer `i`  increases from `a` to `b` \(inclusive\). Notice that since we now have a counter variable `i` in our program, we can take advantage of that in the inner code block. Below is again what the syntax would look like if we want to print the value of `y` three times.

   ```ruby
   1.upto(3) do |i|
       puts y
   end
   ```

   Again just as a reminder, `upto` iteratively increases the value of the counter variable from a starting value to an ending value **inclusively**. This means that the call of `a.upto(b)` on a counter variable `i` would yield the equivalent range of $$[a, b]$$ for $$i$$ $$(a \leq i \leq b)$$

3. ```ruby
   a.step(b, c) {|i| <codeblock> }
   ```

   The program above may look a bit confusing. Let's break it down by variables and their meanings. 

   * `i` : the counter variable \(that will increase iteratively throughout\)
   * `a` : the starting number for `i`
   * `b`: the ending number for `i` \(**notice that this is also inclusive for** `b`\)
   * `c`: the number of steps, meaning **the value the counter variable will be incremented for each iteration**

   Let's take a look again at the same example of printing the value of `y` three times with this syntax:

   ```ruby
   1.step(3, 1) {|i| puts y}
   ```

   As shown above, since we set the step to 1, the code `1.step(3, 1)` is equivalent to `1.upto(3)` . 





