# 2.8 Blocks

### Blocks and Curly Braces 

As you might have seen in various parts of the textbook already, when we are using iteration, there is usually a pair of open and close curly braces that comes right after the declaration of the iteration. For example, when we want to print the integer `3` two times, one way to achieve this is through the iteration below:

```ruby
2.times {puts 3}
```

The curly braces above encloses a block of codes that can be executed again and again based on the iteration **defined by what comes before it** \(in this case, `2.times`\).

Another example is when we talk about anonymous functions with Procs and Lambdas. For example, if we want to define an anonymous function that returns the first letter of a given string `x` , we can write it with the following syntax:

```ruby
f = Proc.new {|string| string[0]}
f.call("Berkeley") # will return the letter "B"
```

Again, we can see the pair of curly braces **coming right after the declaration of Proc,** inside which is the block of code that will be executed upon the input `x` to the Proc. 

As you might begin to realize, there seems to be **an associative relationship** between what comes before the curly braces and what goes inside the curly braces. Let's formalize this relationship by defining what blocks are in Ruby. 

### Blocks - One of Ruby's Most Cherished Gems

Probably one of the most defining and important characteristics of Ruby, blocks are a special chunk of codes that you can **link with different method invocations**, such as iteration, or the creation of an anonymous function, as if they were the parameters of those invocations. 

There are primarily two kinds of blocks in Ruby: **single-line blocks** and **multi-line blocks**

### Single-line Blocks

As we have already seen in the iteration and Proc examples above, single-line blocks are defined by a pair of curly braces, inside which contains the line of codes to execute. Single-line blocks are tightly bound to the method invocations they are linked with, as we have seen with both the declaration of iterations and anonymous functions. 

Here is the general syntax of single-line block:

```ruby
<method invocation> { <single-line code> }
```

Notice that the position of method invocation doesn't actually have to be necessarily at the front. We will introduce other cases in later parts of this chapter. 

### Multi-line Blocks

As you might have not noticed, but multi-line blocks are probably the most prevalently used component in Ruby. You probably have already unawarely used it many times! 

In the syntax below, you will see why it is so prevalent:

```ruby
do
    <multi-line codes>
end
```

As shown above, the `do ... end` structure you are so familiar with when defining a method, iterating, or declaring an anonymous function is actually the structure for a multi-line block! The `def` statement during the initialization of a method just simply links the multi-line block of codes with the method itself. 

### Invoking Blocks Within a Method

Besides having the curly braces come right after the method invocation or inserting a multi-line block into the `do ... end` structure, there is another common way of invoking blocks. As you will see very soon, this way is convenient in the sense that it helps format the structure of your program very clearly and makes multiple calls of the block very simple. 

Suppose we have defined a method `call_block` with no passed-in arguments, and we have a block of codes outside the method that we want to call 2 times. Here is the general syntax to do so:

```ruby
def call_block
    ...
    yield
    yield
    ...
end

call_block <block>
```

As we can see, the keyword `yield` directly invokes whichever code block we are associating the method with in line 8. The passed-in-arguments comparison in the early part of this section also seems understandable now. 

For the code block `<block>` , we can pass in either a single-line block or a multi-line block. For example,

```ruby
call_block {puts 3}
```

```ruby
call_block do
    puts 3
    puts 3
end
```

will both work in this case, with the first one printing 3 once, and the second one printing 3 twice. 

{% hint style="info" %}
As we have seen, there are 2 yields in the method `call_block` . **Suppose no other parts inside this method are printing anything out**, what would a call to the method that is associated with the single-line block and the multi-line block above output in the console?
{% endhint %}

### Passing Parameters to a Block 

We actually have also seen this multiple times already in the textbook. For instance, in the Proc example we have shown at the very beginning of this section, we are passing in a variable `x` :

```ruby
f = Proc.new {|string| string[0]}
```

To generalize, the syntax of a block with passed-in variables is as below:

```ruby
#Suppose we are inside the block now#
|<passed-in arguments>| <code block>
#Now we are exiting the block#
```

For example, if we want to create a multi-line block that prints the sum and the product of two passed-in variables, we can write it as below:

```ruby
do |x, y|
    puts x + y
    puts x * y
end 
```

Invoking a block with passed-in parameters within in a method is also very similar to what we have seen in the previous subsection with a call to the keyword `yield` . The only difference this time will be that we are treating `yield` as a method and pass in the values to the parameters in the block as we would for any regular method. 

Here is an example:

```ruby
def call_block
    ...
    yield 3
    yield 2
    ...
end

call_block {|x| puts x}
```

As shown above, we are passing in the numbers 3 and 2 each time to the associated block that prints them out. 





