# 1.12 Problem Set - B

**For the following questions 13~20**, you should either provide a short explanation or a block of codes fulfilling the requirements from the question.

13. **Temperature Converter**: Define a method called `converter` that converts a temperature from in Fahrenheit to in Celsius. Reminder, the Fahrenheit to Celsius formula is shown below:

$$
C = \frac{5}{9}(F-32)
$$

Note: Your method should output the converted temperature in **decimal format.**

14. **Re-expressing Integers**: Zack, after learning the basic arithmetic operations, claims that he figures out a way of re-expressing a positive integer. This is his claim below. Is he correct? If not, how should you correct it?

Note: You should only modify existent codes. There should be **no need to create any new variable or introduce any new operation.**

```ruby
def same(x)
    c = x - 1
    return x / c * c
```

Now, define **a different method** that re-expresses a positive integer. Your method **should only involve at most the 6 basic arithmetic operators**: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `**`, `%`

15. **Digital Clock**: You're assigned the task to create a converter that displays the time in a day in the format of _hh:mm:ss_ given the seconds elapsed since the beginning of the day \(00:00:00\). Define a conversion method that accomplishes this goal.

16. **Minimum and Maximum Abstraction**: Assume you are given two methods, `min(x, y)` and `max(x, y)`, that returns the smaller and greater of `x` and `y` respectively, define the following methods using **functional abstraction**:

1. A method called `three_max` that takes in 3 numbers and returns **the greatest one**
2. A method called `three_min` that takes in 3 numbers and returns **the smallest one**
3. A method called `middle` that takes in 3 numbers and returns **the middle one**
4. A method called `upper_sum` that takes in 3 numbers and returns **the sum of the two smaller ones**

Make sure you are using **the already defined methods** min and max. Note that a key idea in functional abstraction is that you assume **the method works as expected without worrying about the actual body of the method \(why it works\)**.

17. **Triangular Fun**: Assume you are given the method `max(x, y)` that returns the greater of `x` and `y`, define the following methods using **functional abstraction**:

1. A method called `triangular` that takes in 3 numbers and checks if they can **form the sides of a triangle**
2. A method called `right_triangular` that takes in 3 numbers and checks if they can **form the sides of right triangle**
3. A method called `num_triangular` that takes in 2 numbers and returns the number of possible values a **3rd integer** can take on so that they can **form the sides of a triangle**

Again, make sure you are **only making use of the already defined method** `max`. **Don't use any concept not introduced in this chapter.**

18. **Three-way Split**: Define a method `split` that takes in two strings `A` and `B`, and splits `A` into 3 parts: **the part that comes before** `B`**, the substring** `B`**, and the part comes after** `B`. Assume `B` is a **substring** of `A`. Here is an example below that illustrates this method:

```bash
irb(main):001:0>a, b, c = split('Proactive','act')
irb(main):002:0>puts(a, b, c)
Pro
act
ive
```

You should only use **the string methods defined in this chapter**. Think in terms of the starting and ending positions of each substring.

19. **Tag Remover**: Define a method `tag_remove` that takes in a **tagged string** and removes the tags around it. A **tagged string** is defined as in the following format:

```markup
                            <tag>content.......<tag>
```

Here is an example below that illustrates this method:

```bash
irb(main):001:0>untagged = tag_remove('<html>www.calcentral.berkeley.edu<html>')
irb(main):002:0>puts untagged
www.calcentral.berkeley.edu
```

Removing tags can help **simplify your codes** and make them **more readable** to users.

20. **Change Maker**: Define a method `make_change` that takes in some amount of US dollars and **prints** out **how to make change** for the amount **in terms of the existent dollar bills** in descending order**.** Assume the given amount is a positive integer.

The existent dollar bills \(from largest to smallest\) are: **$50**, **$20**, **$10**, **$5**, and **$1.**

By **descending order**, we mean that you start by trying to make change for the given amount with **the largest dollar bills**, and then the next largest dollar bills with **whatever remains**, and so forth.

Hint: Ruby has a built-in method `.to_s()` that converts a number to string. Here is a sample usage below:

```ruby
num = 5
num_str_now = 5.to_s()
#num_str_now has the value of "5"
```

Here are some examples below that illustrates the `make_change` method:

```bash
irb(main):001:0>make_change(70)
1 $50 bill, 1 $20 bill, 0 $10 bill, 0 $5 bill, and 0 $1 bill
irb(main):002:0>make_change(36)
0 $50 bill, 1 $20 bill, 1 $10 bill, 1 $5 bill, and 1 $1 bill
irb(main):003:0>make_change(4)
0 $50 bill, 0 $20 bill, 0 $10 bill, 0 $5 bill, and 4 $1 bill
```

