# 1.8 Running Your Codes

So far, we have written all our codes in a `.rb` file. Everything in the file won't actually **get executed**until we open the terminal and run the program.

Before we introduce an interactive way of programming in Ruby, let's first talk about **how to execute ruby codes on your laptop.**

1. Open your Terminal
2. Go to the **directory** under which you save your ruby file

   This can be done by using the following syntax:

   ```bash
   cd parentFolder\otherFolders...\destinationFolder
   ```

   `cd` stands for change directory.

3. Once you are under the correct directory, you can call the following syntax to check if your ruby file is actually inside the folder:

   ```bash
   ls
   ```

   This will display all the files by their names

   If you happen to enter the wrong directory, you can repeatedly call `cd ..` \(notice **the space**between `cd` and `..`\) to return to the previous directory. Or you can just call `cd` to directly return to the home directory \(**the directory you always begin with when you open a terminal**\).

4. Once you are in the right directory, you can just call `ruby filename.rb` to execute your file containing the ruby codes. **Note** that you need have the `.rb` subscript in the file name, which marks the file as an actual Ruby document. Below is a simple example:

   Suppose I have a ruby file called **begin.ruby** under the directory **E98/Chapter1**, and the Ruby file contains the following codes:

   ```ruby
   x = 3 + 4
   y = 'Berkeley'
   puts y[3..x]
   ```

   I can run the following commands \(not all at once\) in the terminal to execute my codes:

   ```bash
   ~ username$ cd E98/Chapter1
   Chapter1 username$ ruby begin.rb
   keley
   ```

   To recap, the commands above can be broken down into **two parts**: 1. **Change to the right directory** using `cd`, `cd ..` 2. **Run the code file** using `ruby filename.rb`

### The Interactice Ruby \(IRB\) Interpreter <a id="the-interactice-ruby-irb-interpreter"></a>

In the section above, we have discussed how to **run a Ruby file** with ruby codes in it. However, sometimes we want to see and test the result of just a few lines of Ruby codes **without having to go back and edit the code file**. This motivates us to introduce the **Interactive Ruby Interpreter**, also known as **IRB**.

**IRB** is like a dynamic program that will show the results of any Ruby statements you feed it. Playing with Ruby code in interactive sessions like this is a fantastic way to learn the language through **exploring different options** and **trials and errors**.

To run the **IRB** in your terminal, simply go to your terminal and enter the command `irb`. This will start the **IRB** interface.

```bash
... username$ irb
irb(main):001:0>
```

You can then start coding **line by line**. To familiarize yourself with the interactive interpreter, you can start by running some of the codes we use as an example in the previous chapters.

**It is important that you understand how the IRB interpreter works,** as it will be a vital part of our introduction to the programming language.

**Note**: For **Linux** user, open up a shell, and enter `irb` to start your session. For **Windows** user, open `Interactive Ruby` from the Ruby section of your start menu. For more help on how to run the interpreter, either go to the official Ruby website below or post your question on slack.

**Official Ruby Website**: [https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/quickstart/](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/quickstart/)

